## Abstract {.page_break_before}

The common γ-chain receptor cytokines are promising immune therapies due to their central role in coordinating the proliferation and activity of various immune cell populations. One of these cytokines, interleukin (IL)-2, has potential as a therapy in autoimmunity but is limited in effectiveness by its modest specificity toward regulatory T cells (T~reg~s). IL-2 muteins with altered receptor-ligand binding kinetics can improve the cell type selectivity of the signaling response. Furthermore, therapeutic ligands are often made dimeric as antibody Fc fusions to confer desirable pharmacokinetic benefits, with under-explored consequences on signaling. Here, we systematically profiled the signaling responses to a wide variety of wild type and mutein IL-2 molecules in various Fc fusion configurations. We used a tensor-structured dimensionality reduction scheme to decompose the responses of each cell population to each ligand over a range of time points and cytokine concentrations. We found that dimeric muteins are uniquely specific for T~reg~s at intermediate ligand concentrations, a desirable quality for immunosuppressive drugs. To dissect the mechanism of enhanced T~reg~ specificity in dimeric ligands, we compared signaling response across all treatments to a simple, two-step multivalent binding model. Our model was able to predict cellular responses with high accuracy. Bivalent Fc fusions display enhanced specificity and potency for T~reg~s through avidity effects toward IL-2Rα, and this enhancement is distinct from what is achieved by mutein affinity changes. We then utilize our model to identify the potential benefits conferred by valency engineering as an additional mechanism for cytokines with optimized therapeutic benefits. In total, these findings represent a comprehensive analysis of how ligand properties, and their consequent effects on surface receptor-ligand interactions, translate to selective activation of immune cell populations. It also identifies a new route toward engineering even more selective therapeutic cytokines.

## Significance Statement

Significant off-target immune cell proliferation caused by pleiotropic IL-2 signaling has hindered its efficacy as an immunotherapeutic. Here, we show that bivalent IL-2 muteins exhibit selective signaling in regulatory T cells with respect to effector immune cells, an important design criterion for IL-2 based autoimmune treatments. We then show that this selectivity is mediated through altered surface receptor-ligand binding kinetics using a multivalent binding model. Finally, our model shows that even more selective IL-2 therapies may be developed by desiging cytokines in even higher valency formats, revealing valency as an unexplored route for engineering specific IL-2 responses.
