## Introduction

Cytokines that bind to the common γ-chain (γ~c~) receptor, including interleukin (IL)-2, 4, 7, 9, 15, and 21, are a critical hub in modulating both innate and adaptive immune responses [@DOI:10.1016/j.immuni.2019.03.028]. The cytokine family operates through a common theme of binding private receptors for each ligand before engaging the common γ~c~ receptor to induce signaling. A prominent phenotypic outcome of γ~c~ receptor signaling is lymphoproliferation, and so the cytokines are often observed to be an endogenous or exogenous mechanism for altering the balance of immune cell types. This phenotype is observed most extremely from loss-of-function or reduced activity mutations in γ~c~ which subvert T and NK cell maturation [@PMID:8462096]. Disruptive mutations in private receptors can lead to more selective reductions in cell types such as regulatory T cells (T~reg~s) with IL-2Rα or T cells with IL-7Rα [@DOI:10.1016/j.immuni.2019.03.028]. Conversely, activating mutations in these receptors, such as IL-7Rα, promote cancers such as B and T cell leukemias [@DOI:10.1038/ng.924].

The importance of these cytokines to immune homeostasis and challenges in altering their signaling toward specific therapeutic goals have inspired a variety of engineered forms. Perhaps the most common approach has been to alter the receptor affinities of IL-2 to weaken its interaction with IL-2Rα, IL-2Rβ, or both receptors. IL-2Rα confers T~reg~s with greater sensitivity toward IL-2, and so IL-2Rα affinity tunes the relative amount of signaling toward regulatory versus effector populations, while IL-2Rβ modulates the overall signaling potency [@PMID:25992859]. In most cases, the wild-type cytokine or mutein is fused to an IgG antibody to take advantage of FcRn-mediated recycling for extended half-life. The antibody has also been employed in a more active role by binding to IL-2 to influence its availability to each receptor in so-called immunocytokines [@PMID:25992858]. Fc fusion has taken many forms, including orienting the cytokine in an N-terminal or C-terminal orientation, including one or two cytokines per IgG, and including or excluding Fc effector functions [@DOI:10.1101/778894]. Notably, bivalent cytokine fusions have been noted to be more potent in T~reg~-targeted engineered therapies, perhaps through pharmacokinetic or other means [@DOI:10.1126/sciimmunol.aba5264]. The potential design space for these molecules quickly becomes experimentally intractable without consistent design principles.

To address this challenge, here we systematically evaluate the signaling specificity effects of engineered cytokine alterations, including affinity-altering mutations and Fc-fusion formats. We explore three hypotheses for the observed effect of bivalency in Fc-cytokine fusions. We find that the effect of bivalency can be fully explained by altered binding selectivity toward cell based on their abundances. The signaling specificity of all muteins and Fc-formats match well with a multivalent binding model, both between cell types and across cell-to-cell variation within a cell type. Finally, we propose that cytokine valency is an unexplored axis for further enhancing selective signaling responses and that many opportunities for using multivalency engineering exist within the γ~c~ cytokine family.
