## Results

### Potential mechanisms of bivalency effects

![**Possible effects of bivalent Fc-cytokine formats.** A) Multivalent ligands are known to bind to surface receptors with altered functional affinities, which varies as a function of the number of receptors displayed by the cell. B) Cartoon illustrating how ligand valency may alter signal transduction dynamics. Multivalent binding has been shown to be critical in some signaling pathways via the local aggragation of active signaling complexes. C)  Multivalently bound receptors have been shown to be degraded intracellularly at a rate differing from monovalently bound receptors and have also been shown to possess altered _in vivo_ pharmacokinetics.](./output/figureC1.svg){#fig:mbEff}

Bivalent γ~c~ cytokines have been shown to display altered potency and cell-type-selective signaling profiles, both _in vitro_ and _in vivo_ [@PMID:25457307]. This alteration has lead to both increases and reductions in the mutein's propensity for immune suppression; these variable outcomes may occur due to the differing affinities of the IL-2 mutein employed in the Fc fusions [@PMID:25457307; @DOI:10.1126/sciimmunol.aba5264]. The mechanism by which multivalency induces altered signaling compared to monovalent ligands in the γ~c~ signaling pathways has not been systematically explored. The possible origins of the differences between monovalent and bivalent cytokine signaling profiles are varied, and each would influence the use of this alteration toward therapeutic ends.

As a first possibility, multivalent γ~c~ ligands may induce signaling through altered surface-receptor interactions (Fig. {@fig:mbEff}a). While monovalent ligands can only bind and ultimately transduce signal through a single receptor complex, multivalent ligands can potentially engage two or more complexes simultaneously. This change in signaling activity ultimately leads to an altered functional affinity, referred to as avidity. Among other effects, avidity leads to varied binding depending on the abundance of target receptors [@PMID:30507196]. In fact, this has been used with IL-2 to deliver cytotoxic cargo more selectively to T~reg~s [@PMID:24462799].

A second possible effect of multivalency is assembly of fundamentally distinct signaling complexes (Fig. {@fig:mbEff}b). Multivalent ligands, by binding multiple receptor complexes, can increase local receptor concentration leading to increases in downstream signal transduction [@DOI:10.1002/anie.200502794]. Clustering multiple IL-2Rβ/γ~c~/IL-2 complexes may also help promote more potent or distinct forms of signaling compared to a single complex achievable with monovalent IL-2. Composition of the active receptor complex is critical to the types of signaling responses observed, exemplified by the distinct signaling of "synthekines" that activate combinations of cytokine receptors [@DOI:10.7554/eLife.22882].

Finally, multivalent ligands may have distinct responses due to pharmacokinetic (PK) or cell trafficking changes (Fig. {@fig:mbEff}c). IL-2 is rapidly cleared primarily through receptor-mediated endocytosis after Fc fusion, meaning that PK is closely tied to its activity [@DOI:10.1007/s00262-002-0302-6]. Nanoparticles and ligands of higher valency are endocytosed through altered mechanisms, ultimately leading to changes in intracellular degradation rates [@PMID:9873065]. The PK and _in vivo_ half-lives of γ~c~ cytokines are also modulated by their valency, with effects, in turn, on PK [@PMID:25457307]. Changes in PK are especially important to selective expansion of T~reg~s as this seems to be promoted most prominently by sustained signaling, over transient boluses of IL-2 [@DOI:10.1182/blood-2018-99-117622]. Overall, bivalency can have a multitude effects on the use of IL-2 therapeutically, in what experimental systems it will be observed, and how it might be further exploited, depending upon the mechanism of its effects.

### Bivalent Fc-cytokine fusions have distinct cell specificity but shared dynamics

![**pSTAT5 response varies in a cell type- and treatment-specific manner.** A) Schematic representation of non-negative canonical polyadic (CP) decomposition. Experimental pSTAT5 measurements are arranged in a tensor according to the duration of treatment, ligand used, cytokine concentration, and cell type. CP decomposition then helps to visualize this space. B) Percent variance reconstructed (R2X) versus the number of components used. C) Component values for each IL-2 form. D) Component values representing the effect of IL-2 concentration. E) Component values representing cell type specificity. F) Component values for the effect of treatment duration.](./output/figureC2.svg){#fig:tfac}

Exploring how dynamic responses vary across responding cell types and ligand treatments is challenging due to the multi-dimensional space of potential origins of variations. To explore the determinants of IL-2 response in a systematic manner, we stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) collected from a single donor with 13 IL-2 muteins with varying receptor affinities in both monomeric and dimeric Fc-fusion formats (Table S1). Stimulated cells were collected at four time points using 12 treatment concentrations. The PBMCs were then stained for canonical cell type markers and pSTAT5, a read-out of signaling response, allowing us to separate response by cell type. Four different cell types (T~reg~, T~helper~, CD8+, NK) were gated and quantified (Fig. {@fig:S1}a-d). T~reg~s, and T~helper~s were further dissected according to their IL-2Rα abundances into low, average, and high expression subpopulations by isolating sub-populations using three evenly logarithmically spaced bins (Fig. {@fig:S1}j).

Restricting ones’ view to a single time point, cell type, or ligand concentration provides only a slice of the picture [@DOI:10.1101/778894; @DOI:10.1101/2021.01.03.425138]. To provide a more comprehensive view of response, we organized our profiling experiments into a four-dimensional tensor, wherein the position along each dimension represented the ligand used, concentration, treatment duration, or cell type in the profiling. We then factored this data using non-negative canonical polyadic (CP) decomposition to derive factors summarizing the influence of each dimension (Fig. {@fig:tfac}a). Three components explained roughly 90% of the variance within the dataset (Fig. {@fig:tfac}b).

Factorization separated distinct response profiles into separate components, and the effect of each dimension into separate factors. For instance, component 1 almost exclusively represented responses to wild-type cytokines, which were the only ligands which were not Fc-conjugated (Fig. {@fig:tfac}c) at high concentrations (Fig. {@fig:tfac}d), with broad specificity (Fig. {@fig:tfac}e) and a signaling profile that peaks at 30 minutes and then decreases (Fig. {@fig:tfac}f). An alternative way to interpret the factorization results is to compare profiles within a single dimension. For example, component 1 led to a less sustained profile of signaling response as compared to the other signaling patterns (Fig. {@fig:tfac}f).

Remarkably, components 2 and 3 cleanly separated ligands conjugated in bivalent or monovalent forms respectively (Fig. {@fig:tfac}c). In fact, ligand valency was represented more prominently than differences in receptor affinity between muteins. Component 2 had high T~reg~ specificity (Fig. {@fig:tfac}e) and was most represented at intermediate concentrations (Fig. {@fig:tfac}d). Component 2 was also more correllated the subsets of T~reg~ and T~helper~ cells expressing high amounts of IL-2Rα, suggesting that bivalent molecule's specificty for T~reg~s is mediated by their larger abundances of IL-2Rα.  Component 3 had a broad cell response (Fig. {@fig:tfac}e) and increased monotonically with concentration (Fig. {@fig:tfac}d). Despite these strong differences in specificities both components had nearly identical time dynamics (Fig. {@fig:tfac}f). In total, these results indicated ligand valency as a critical determinant of IL-2 specificity, and that while Fc fusion subtly affected the specificity of response, monovalent and bivalent ligands had identical dynamics.

### Differences among IL-2 responses are explained by a simple multivalent binding model

![**Responses are predicted by a simple multivalent binding model.** All accuracies are calculated as a Pearson's correlation R^2^ score for experimental cytokine responses at the 30 minute and one hour time points. A) A simplified cartoon of the model. Initial association of multivalent ligands proceeds according to monovalent affinity, and subsequent binding events proceed with that affinity scaled by the $K_x^{*}$ parameter. B) Experimentally measured vs. predicted pSTAT5 responses for all cell types, ligands, and concentrations. C,D) Model's accuracy subsetted by cell type (C) and ligand (D) for all mono- and bivalent IL-2 muteins. E) Model's accuracy when predicting the responses of all cell types to bivalent ligands either correctly as dimers, or as IL-2 monomers. F,G) Model's accuracy subsetted by concentration (F) for all ligands and time (G) for all ligands, concentrations, and cell types.](./output/figureC3.svg){#fig:mbMod}

With the indication that T~reg~ specificity is enhanced by multivalency without changes to signaling dynamics, we sought to evaluate how well cell surface binding on its own could predict response. We employed a two-step, equilibrium, multivalent binding model to predict cellular response to IL-2 muteins by assuming that signaling response was proportional to the amount of active receptor-ligand complexes [@DOI:10.1101/2021.03.10.434776]. See methods for specifics about how binding predictions were used to predict pSTAT5 response. We fit this model to our signaling profiling experiments and evaluated its concordance with the data. The only non-scaling fitting parameter, $K_x^{*}$, had an optimum at $1.2 × 10^{-11}$ #/cell, consistent with that seen for other receptor families [@PMID:29960887; @perelson; @PMID:11606269]. Overall, we observed remarkable consistency between predicted and observed response (R^2^ = 0.85; Fig. {@fig:mbMod}b). This high accuracy was maintained within subsets of the data including individual cell types and ligands (Fig. {@fig:mbMod}c–d). To verify our model’s predictions were dependent on the valency of the molecule, we again fit the model enforcing that all ligands were monovalent. This significantly reduced model accuracy for many of the bivalent ligands (Fig. {@fig:mbMod}e), confirming that multivalent binding was critical in modeling signaling response.

To ensure that our model was not simply capturing a trend towards higher signaling with increasing concentration, we examined our model's accuracy within specific cytokine concentrations (Fig. {@fig:mbMod}f). As expected, our model was unable to predict response at the lowest concentrations, as these concentrations did not stimulate signaling and were dominated by experimental noise, but increased in accuracy at concentrations where any signaling response was observed. Finally, we examined how our model’s accuracy varied with time by fitting the model to each time point individually. As expected, given that longer treatments likely involve various compensatory signaling such as the degradation or increased transcription of IL-2 receptor subunits [@PMID:PMC3010113; @PMID:PMC3501574], we most accurately predicted initial responses (30 mins) with a slight decrease in accuracy over longer timescales (Fig. {@fig:mbMod}g). In total, multivalent cell surface binding showed quantitative agreement with the pattern of cell-type-specific responses to IL-2 muteins, supporting that the specificity enhancement of bivalency is derived from cell surface binding avidity.

### Multivalency provides a general strategy for further enhanced signaling selectivity

![**Multivalency with coordinate affinity adjustments can enhance selectivity.** Affinities were allowed to vary between K~D~s of 10 pM and 1 µM while $K_x^{*}$ was fixed at its fitting optimum. All optimizations were performed using a concentration of 1 nM. Selectivity was calculated as the ratio of predicted pSTAT5 in target cells to the mean pSTAT5 predicted in off-target cells. A,C,E) Signaling response of T~reg~, NK cells, and T~helper~ cells predicted for ligand of optimal selectivity at different valencies. Response predictions were normalized to each population's response for the monovalent case. Selectivity for T~reg~s and NK cells were derived from IL-2 muteins, and selectivity for T~helper~s was calculated using IL-7 muteins. B,D,F) Optimal receptor-ligand dissociation constants for each ligand optimized for selectivity. Mutein affinity for IL-2Rα and IL-2Rβ/γ~c~ was allowed to vary for IL-2 muteins, and affinity for IL-7Rα was allowed to vary for IL-7 muteins.](./output/figureC4.svg){#fig:opt}

Given that a simple binding model accurately predicted cell-type-specific responses to IL-2 and that bivalent, Fc-fused IL-2 muteins have favorable specificity properties, we sought to computationally explore to what extent multivalency might be a generally useful strategy. While monovalent ligand binding scales linearly with receptor abundance, multivalent ligands bind nonlinearly depending upon receptor abundance [@doi:10.1038/srep40098]. Thus, multivalent ligands should be able to selectively target cells with uniquely high expression of certain γ~c~ family receptors.

Valency enhancements are only apparent with coordinated changes in receptor-ligand binding affinities [@DOI:10.1101/2020.11.25.398974]. Therefore, we optimized the receptor affinities of simulated ligands while varying valency. We first designed IL-2 muteins of varying valency to obtain optimal T~reg~ specificity (Fig. {@fig:opt}a). As expected, ligand valency increased achievable selectivity past what was achievable using the bivalent cytokine format at any receptor affinity. Higher valency required reduced IL-2Rα affinities (Fig. {@fig:opt}b).

We then explored whether IL-2 muteins lacking IL-2Rα binding could selectively target NK cells, based on their uniquely high expression of IL-2Rβ, with similar results; IL-2 muteins of higher valency were predicted to be highly selective for activation of NK cells, so long as IL-2Rβ/γ~c~ affinity was coordinately decreased (Fig. {@fig:opt}c,d). Finally, we sought to explore T~helper~-selective muteins of IL-7, as they express high amounts of IL-7Rα (Fig. {@fig:S1}i). We again found that ligands of higher valency should achieve higher degrees of selectivity for these cells, but that the benefits of valency were less than the targeting of T~reg~s or NK cells using IL-2 mutants because CD8+ T cells have similar IL-7Rα amounts (Fig. {@fig:opt}e). These benefits were again found to be contingent on decreasing affinity of the IL-7 muteins for IL-7Rα at higher valency (Fig. {@fig:opt}f). In total, these results show that valency has unexplored potential for designing cytokines with enhanced therapeutic efficacy and reduced toxicity. They also show the potential benefit of the computational framework described above in guiding therapeutic development.
