## Discussion

<!-- what we did -->

In this paper, we systematically explored the unique contributions which cytokine multivalency plays in determining cell type response to IL-2 and IL-2 muteins. Using a highly standardized and expansive dataset containing hPBMC responses to 13 IL-2 muteins, including both monovalent and bivalent variants, we constructed a signaling response tensor. Then, using an unbiased structure decomposition scheme to visualize the effect which multivalency had on cell type specific signaling. We then used a simple multivalent equilibrium binding model to explore the extent to which the distinct signaling behavior induced by bivalent ligands could be explained by their altered surface-receptor interaction kinetics. We found that the model was effectively able to predict cell type specific response to IL-2 muteins with high accuracy by predicting the amount of active receptor-ligand signaling complexes. Finally, we sought to determine whether cytokines of higher valencies could offer greater cell type selectivity, and ultimately better potential therapeutic efficacy. 

The work described here serves as a demonstration of the critical, unexplored effect which ligand valency plays in determining cell type specific signaling. For example, we demonstrated that bivalent ligands were highly selective for T~reg~ cells at intermediate ligand concentrations, even above their monovalent counterparts using tensor factorization techniques (Fig. {@fig:tfac}). The model described here serves as a versatile tool for exploring the potential benefits which valency engineering has in designing therapeutics with greater cell type selectivity, and thus reduced off-target effects, reduced toxicities, and greater therapeutic efficacies. While it is known that multivalency can alter signaling activity through a variety of mechanisms, including altered signal transduction, pharmacokinetics, and trafficking dynamics, the accuracy of our binding model suggests that the unique signaling activities displayed by multivalent ligands can be largely explained by their altered avidities [@DOI:10.1002/anie.200502794; @DOI:10.7554/eLife.22882; @PMID:9873065; @PMID:25457307](Fig. {@fig:mbMod}). The mechanistic nature of the model furthers its utility; for example, we were able to determine that the selectivity which bivalent molecules have for T~reg~s arises as a result of this cell type's high constitutive abundance of IL-2Rα, which increased the avidity with which they bind multivalent IL-2 relative to cells with lower densities of IL-2Rα Finally, the model was shown to serve as a useful tool for guiding the engineering of super-selective ligands of higher valency. Using mathematical optimization, we demonstrated that, with coordinate changes to affinity, higher valency IL-2 ligands were able to display greater optimal selectivy for either T~reg~s or NK cells, and that engineering of higher-valency IL-7 ligands may prove useful in designing a T~helper~ selective therapy (Fig. {@fig:opt}).

<!-- Applications and problems (in intro) (expression problems, not necessarily translated in vivo, need to know relative abundances)-->

We have shown here that multivalent ligands may be used to design more effective IL-2 based therapeutics. For example, here we have explored the potential benefit which multivalent IL-2 ligands have in selectively expanding T~reg~s, an important design criterion considered in the design of IL-2 based treatments for autoimmune diseases [@DOI/10.1016/j.jaut.2018.10.017; @DOI/0.1016/j.immuni.2015.04.015; 10.1038/s41392-017-0002-5]. The reduction in off-target population signaling which may be displayed by muteins in multivalent formats could lead to more efficacious IL-2 based therapies. Combined with the superior ~in vivo~ half-life conferred by Fc-conjugated IL-2 muteins, these multivalent therapeutics could potentially be used in an out-patient setting and require less frequent dosing. We also demonstrated the potential benefit which multivalency may confer in the selective activation of NK cells, which could lead to similarly improved anti-cancer treatments [@DOI/10.1038/s41586-018-0830-7].

While our model does effectively capture cell type specific response to IL-2 and IL-2 muteins and can be readily applied to other well-studied signaling families, several challenges in its implementation and applications remain. First, the model requires extensive characterization of both the signaling family itself, and of the pertinent cell types involved in signaling [@DOI/10.1016/j.cels.2018.05.018]. Isolation of these cell types and subsequent quantitation of their receptor abundances must be executed. Binding analysis is also reliant on characterization of all receptor-ligand kinetics. While our model provides actionable guidelines for the modulation of receptor-ligand interactions in conjunction with valency engineering, precision engineering of ligand affinities remains a complicated protein engineering challenge. The fabrication of stable ligands of high valency also poses significant challenges to the fabrication of the super-selective, high valency ligands proposed in our analysis [@DOI//10.1016/j.jim.2017.05.008]. Furthermore, we have not yet experimentally validated whether the advantages conferred by bivalent ligands ~in vitro~ translate to ~in vivo~ settings.

The design of cell type selective ligands is complicated by the complex signaling processes by which they induce cellular signaling, which leads to a combinatorial explosion of potential ligand design objectives [@DOI/10.1016/j.cell.2017.08.015]. We have shown that, through use of tensor factorization analysis of immune cell response to IL-2 muteins that multivalency remains a critical unexplored axis in these ligand engineering efforts. Then, through use of a simple, multivalent binding model, we showed that surface receptor-ligand interactions play a governing role in explaining cell type specific signaling activity, revealing an inexpensive computational tool for guiding the engineering of more selective therapeutics. Our approach here may be applied to engineer selectivity into other signaling systems characterized by pleiotropy, such as the IL-4/IL-13 or TNF systems [@DOI/10.1126/science.1085458; @DOI/10.1073/pnas.1520175113]
