## Supplementary Figures

### Table S1. IL-2 variants' affinities for IL-2R subunits.


|    Ligand      	|    IL-2Rα Affinity ($K_D$, nM)	|    IL-2Rβ/γ~c~ Affinity ($K_D$, nM)         	| 
|--------------------------	|--------------	|--------------------------	|
|    WT IL-2      	|    10.0   	|    0.133	|
|    WT N-term        	|    0.19   	|    5.296	|
|    WT C-term        	|    0.54   	|    3.043	|
|    V91K C-term       	|    0.69   	|    7.5586	|
|    R38Q N-term       	|    0.71   	|    3.9949	|
|    F42Q N-Term        	|    9.48   	|    2.815	|
|    N88D C-term        	|    1.01   	|    24.0166	|
|    H16N N-term        	|    0.43   	|    22.35	|
|    R38Q/H16N       	|    0.71   	|    22.35	|

![**Receptor quantification and gating of PBMC-derived immune cell types.** A&B) Gating for fixed $T_{helper}$ and $T_{reg}$ cells during pSTAT5 quantification. C&D) Fixed CD8+ T cell and NK cell gating. E&F) Gating for live $T_{helper}$ and $T_{reg}$ cells during receptor quantification. G) Live cell NK cell gating. H) Live cell CD8+ cell gating. I) Receptor quantification for each cell type. Experiments were performed in quadruplicate (N=4) J) IL-2Rα and IL-2Rβ abundances on IL-2Rα high and low T~reg~ and T~helper~ populations. Cells were binned using three evenly logarithmically spaced bins between 5th and 95th percentile of IL-2Rα abundance.](./output/figureS1.svg){#fig:S1 tag="S1"}

![**Full panel of predicted versus actual immune cell type responses to monomeric and dimeric IL-2 muteins.** Dots represent flow cytometry measurements and lines represent pSTAT response predicted by model. Experimental pSTAT measurements are shown for 0.5 and 1 hour timepoints. Predictions and experiments are shown for $T_{reg}$s, $T_{helper}$s, NK and CD8 cells. Each point is representative of one experimental output (N=1).Shaded regions are indicative of standard error prediction when scalar factor converting between signaling complexes and MFI was fit to multiple experiments.](./output/figureS2.svg){#fig:S2 tag="S2"}

![**Full panel of predicted versus actual IL-2Rα high medium, and low $T_{reg}$ and $T_{helper}$ responses to monomeric and dimeric IL-2 muteins.** Dots represent flow cytometry measurements and lines represent pSTAT response predicted by model. Experimental pSTAT measurements are shown for 0.5 and 1 hour timepoints. Predictions and experiments are shown for $T_{reg}$s, $T_{helper}$s which have been binned by their IL-2Rα abundances. Each point is representative of one experimental output (N=1). Shaded regions are indicative of standard error prediction when scalar factor converting between signaling complexes and MFI was fit to multiple experiments.](./output/figureS3.svg){#fig:S3 tag="S3"}
