Manuscript/Text/01_Introduction.md, before:

---
title: Tensor Factorization Maps Computation Performed by the Common Gamma Chain Receptors
author:
- name: Adam Weiner
  affilnum: a
- name: Ali Farhat
  affilnum: a
- name: Aaron S. Meyer
  affilnum: a,b
keywords: [IL2, IL15, IL21, IL4, IL7, IL9, common gamma chain, cytokines, receptors, immunology, T cells, NK cells]
affiliation:
- name: Department of Bioengineering, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research; University of California, Los Angeles
  key: a
- name: Contact info
  key: b
bibliography: ./Manuscript/References.bib
abstract: Many receptor families are comprised of pleitropic interactions among multiple ligands, receptors, and cells. The multivariate nature of these systems confounds intuition and therapeutic manipulation. 
link-citations: true
csl: ./Manuscript/Templates/nature.csl
---

# Summary points

- One
- Two
- Three

# Introduction

- The common gamma chain cytokine family is central to regulation of the immune system
- Many receptor families are composed of multiple ligands, receptors, and cell populations
	- [@Antebi_BMP]
- Efforts to engineer gc behavior and/or gc treatments
    - [@ring_mechanistic_2012]
- Efforts to model behavior of cytokine families
    - Model of T cell proliferative response to IL-2 and IL-4. [@BURKE199742]
    - High level model of how IL-2 feedback loops regulate T cell populations. [@Feinerman437]
    - Showed how high IL2Ra abundnaces lowered the IL-2 EC50 but dampened the signaling responses of IL-7 and IL-15. Their work was mostly experimental (flow cytometry)  [@Cotarira17] 
- Transition to paper

Commit message:

added Fallon2000 and organized sub-sections

Manuscript/Text/01_Introduction.md, after:

---
title: Tensor Factorization Maps Computation Performed by the Common Gamma Chain Receptors
author:
- name: Adam Weiner
  affilnum: a
- name: Ali Farhat
  affilnum: a
- name: Aaron S. Meyer
  affilnum: a,b
keywords: [IL2, IL15, IL21, IL4, IL7, IL9, common gamma chain, cytokines, receptors, immunology, T cells, NK cells]
affiliation:
- name: Department of Bioengineering, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research; University of California, Los Angeles
  key: a
- name: Contact info
  key: b
bibliography: ./Manuscript/References.bib
abstract: Many receptor families are comprised of pleitropic interactions among multiple ligands, receptors, and cells. The multivariate nature of these systems confounds intuition and therapeutic manipulation. 
link-citations: true
csl: ./Manuscript/Templates/nature.csl
---

# Summary points

- One
- Two
- Three

# Introduction

- The common gamma chain cytokine family is central to regulation of the immune system
- Many receptor families are composed of multiple ligands, receptors, and cell populations
	- [@Antebi_BMP]
- Efforts to engineer gc behavior and/or gc treatments
    - [@ring_mechanistic_2012]
- Efforts to model behavior of cytokine families
    - Modeling that doesn't account for trafficking
        - Model of T cell proliferative response to IL-2 and IL-4. [@BURKE199742]
        - High level model of how IL-2 feedback loops regulate T cell populations. [@Feinerman437]
    - Modeling that accounts for trafficking
        - Accounting for trafficking allows for more accurate ligand depletion and cell proliferation model in case of IL-2. [@Fallon2000]
    - Focused on competition for common gamma chain
        - Showed how high IL2Ra abundnaces lowered the IL-2 EC50 but dampened the signaling responses of IL-7 and IL-15. Their work was mostly experimental (flow cytometry)  [@Cotarira17] 
- Transition to paper
