Manuscript/Text/02_Results.md, before:

# Results

## Building a family-wide model of the common gamma chain cytokine receptors and fitting data to it

![**A family-wide model of the common gamma chain cytokine receptors.** A) Cartoon of all receptor-ligand complexes and binding events. Ligands are circles and complexes are boxes. Active species are denoted by red boxes. Rate constants obtained from literature are denoted by diamonds; those solved through detailed balance are denoted by octagons and those solved through fitting are denoted by octagons with double outline. B-C) Model prediction vs. experimental results for maximal pSTAT5 activation in IL2Ra+/- YT-1 cells under various concentrations of ligand stimulation for 500 minutes. Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles and the 95% confidence intervals of model predictions are denoted by shaded regions. D-G) Model prediction vs. experimental results for percent of initial IL2Rb on the cell surface for various ligand stimulation concentrations and cell types. Measurements were collected over the course of 90 minutes. Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles and the 95% confidence intervals of model predictions are denoted by shaded regions. H) Posterior distributions for IL2's and IL15's analogous reaction rates. Values have units of 1/min and are scaled by log10 for plotting purposes. I-J) Posterior distribution for trafficking rate parameters and receptor expression rates. Trafficking rates have units of 1/min and receptor expression rates have units of number / cell * minute; both are scaled by log10 for plotting purposes.](./Figures/figure1.svg){#fig:modelConstruct}

To generate distributions for our unknown rate parameters, we fit our reaction model to experimental data by using MCMC sampling [@ring_mechanistic_2012]. We then used the posterior distributions t

Commit message:

add comment about analogous rxn discrepancy

Manuscript/Text/02_Results.md, after:

# Results

## Building a family-wide model of the common gamma chain cytokine receptors and fitting data to it

![**A family-wide model of the common gamma chain cytokine receptors.** A) Cartoon of all receptor-ligand complexes and binding events. Ligands are circles and complexes are boxes. Active species are denoted by red boxes. Rate constants obtained from literature are denoted by diamonds; those solved through detailed balance are denoted by octagons and those solved through fitting are denoted by octagons with double outline. B-C) Model prediction vs. experimental results for maximal pSTAT5 activation in IL2Ra+/- YT-1 cells under various concentrations of ligand stimulation for 500 minutes. Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles and the 95% confidence intervals of model predictions are denoted by shaded regions. D-G) Model prediction vs. experimental results for percent of initial IL2Rb on the cell surface for various ligand stimulation concentrations and cell types. Measurements were collected over the course of 90 minutes. Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles and the 95% confidence intervals of model predictions are denoted by shaded regions. H) Posterior distributions for IL2's and IL15's analogous reaction rates. Values have units of 1/min and are scaled by log10 for plotting purposes. I-J) Posterior distribution for trafficking rate parameters and receptor expression rates. Trafficking rates have units of 1/min and receptor expression rates have units of number / cell * minute; both are scaled by log10 for plotting purposes.](./Figures/figure1.svg){#fig:modelConstruct}

To generate distributions for our unknown rate parameters, we fit our reaction model to experimental data by using MCMC sampling [@ring_mechanistic_2012]. We then plugged in the rate parameter distributions into our model in order to generate predictions for the experimental data. The model predictions were overlayed into plots of the experimental data ([@Fig:modelConstruct]B-G). Predictions for percent of maximal pSTAT5 activation had R2X values of ?? (IL2) and ?? (IL15) for IL2Ra- YT-1 cells and of ?? (IL2) and ?? (IL15) for IL2Ra+ YT-1 cells ([@Fig:modelConstruct]B-C).

Our posterior distributions showed that analogous reverse reaction rates were consistently smaller for rates involving IL15 compared to those involving IL2 ([@Fig:modelConstruct]H). This discrepancy in analogous rates indicates that complexes containing IL15 exhibit tighter binding behavior as it takes longer for receptors to dissociate from one another than in IL2 complexes. Furthermore, since the IL2 and IL15 families have IL2Rb and gamma chain in common, the discrepancy in analogous rates speaks to the differences between the alpha chains and ligands in these two families ([@Fig:modelConstruct]A).
