Manuscript/Text/02A_Results.md, before:

# Results

## Family model captures  IL-2 and IL-15 dose response and the effect of IL-2Rα expression

![**A family-wide model of the common gamma chain cytokine receptors.** A) Cartoon of all receptor-ligand complexes and binding events. Ligands are circles and complexes are boxes. Active species are outlined in red. Rate constants obtained from literature are denoted by diamonds; those solved through detailed balance are denoted by octagons and those solved through fitting are denoted by octagons with double outline. Rate constants that were measured as proportional to other rates are denoted by triangles.
B) Model prediction vs. experimental results for maximal pSTAT5 activation in YT-1 cells under various concentrations of ligand stimulation for 500 minutes. Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles for IL-2Rα- cells and circles for IL-2Rα+ cells. The 95% confidence intervals of model predictions are denoted by shaded regions.
C-D) Model prediction vs. experimental results for percent of initial IL-2Rβ on the cell surface for various ligand stimulation concentrations and cell types. Measurements were collected over the course of 90 minutes. Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles for IL-2Rα- cells and circles for IL-2Rα+ cells. The 95% confidence intervals of model predictions are denoted by shaded regions.
E) Posterior distributions for IL-2's and IL-15's analogous reaction rates. All rates have units of 1/min and are scaled by log~10~ for plotting purposes. Rates constants measured in literature are represented by dots.
F-G) Posterior distributions for trafficking rate parameters and receptor expression rates. Trafficking rates have units of 1/min and receptor expression rates have units of $\mathrm{\frac{number}{cell * minute}}$; both are scaled by log~10~ for plotting purposes.
H) Posterior distribution for the pSTAT5 activity scaling constant.
I) XXX. ](./Figures/figure1.svg){#fig:modelConstruct}

To model how individual binding events give rise to cell response, we built a reaction model representing the relevant binding and regulatory mechanisms within the common γ~c~ cytokine family ([@Fig:modelConstruct]A). As endocytic trafficking is a critical mechanism of regulatory feedback for surface receptors and their ligands, we extended earlier efforts by including trafficking of receptors and their complexes [@ring_mechanistic_2012; @Feinerman437]. We assumed that species trafficked into a distinct endocytic compartment where they could continue to produce STAT5 signaling and participate in binding events. Rate parameters for IL-2 and IL-15 binding events were parameterized by direct experimental measurement (diamond), soluble experimental measurement (triangle), detailed balance (octagon), or estimated by fitting model (double outlined octagon) to existing experimental measurements of pSTAT5 and surface IL-2Rβ ([@Fig:modelConstruct]B-D) [@ring_mechanistic_2012].

A novel feature of our model was that it accounted for endosomal trafficking and signaling. Trafficking was deemed an integral part of our model since rapid IL-2Rβ internalization following stimulation with either IL-2 or IL-15 was measured experimentally [@ring_mechanistic_2012]. The trafficking version of the model was fit to both pSTAT5 and surface IL-2Rβ measurements; the posterior parameter distributions taken from these fits were plugged back into our model and accurately fit the data ([@Fig:modelConstruct]B-D). The no-trafficking version of the model was fit to only the pSTAT5 measurements and consequently the posterior parameter distributions were more broadly defined than in the trafficking model ([@Fig:supp1]) [@Geweke92]. The trafficking model also had Geweke convergence scores closer to zero compared to those of the no-trafficking model, indicating that the MCMC processes converged better when trafficking was allowed ([@Fig:supp2]). Additionally, IL-2·IL-2Rα complexes had a higher affinity for IL-2Rβ and γ~c~ than their IL-15·IL-15Rα counterparts in the trafficking model ($k_{4} < k_{16}$ and $k_{11} < k_{23}$); however, the opposite was true for IL-2Rβ ($k_{4} > k_{16}$) and the affinities were equal for γ~c~ ($k_{11} = k_{23}$) in the no-trafficking model ([@Fig:modelConstruct]E, [@Fig:supp1]B). Depletion of surface IL-2Rβ occurs when YT-1 cells were given both IL-2 and IL-15 as both ligands could form active complexes with IL-2Rβ. Consistent with surface receptor depletion driven through rapid active complex internalization, depletion occurred faster at higher cytokine doses ([@Fig:modelConstruct]C-D). Correspondingly, the rate of active complex internalization ($k_{endo,a}$) was ~10x greater than that for inactive species ($k_{endo}$) ([@Fig:modelConstruct]F). In addition to capturing individual dose responses, the model accurately represented the effect of changes in IL-2Rα expression. The experimental pSTAT5 and surface IL-2Rβ data for both IL2-Rα-negative and -expressing YT-1 cells was fit by setting the IL-2Rα expression rate to 0 in the former case and letting the rate vary by the fit parameter in the latter case.

Our model produced specific predictions about the abundance of each receptor within YT-1 cells ([@Fig:modelConstruct]G). To validate these, we experimentally quantified the absolute receptor abundance for YT-1 cells. [add sentence about how accurate this winds up being].

Since IL-2 and IL-15 lead to formation of analogous active complexes, with IL-2Rβ, γ~c~, and a signaling-deficient high-affinity receptor (IL-2Rα/IL-15Rα), comparing their reaction rates gave insight into how IL-2 and IL-15 therapies differ from one another ([@Fig:modelConstruct]E). The reaction rate for forward dimerization ($k_{fwd}$) was estimated to be 0.0031015611 ± 0.0005404771 $\mathrm{\frac{1/min}{num/cell}}$. The two ligands had nearly the same affinity for binding directly to IL-2Rβ and neither ligand binds directly to γ~c~; however, IL-15 had a higher affinity for its α-chain than IL-2 did for its α-chain. We inferred that IL-15’s complexes were much more likely to dimerize with a free α-chain than IL-2’s complexes ($k_{12} >> k_{24}$ and $k_{8} >> k_{20}$). Similarly, IL-15 complexes had a slightly higher affinity for capturing IL-2Rβ and γ~c~ than their IL-2 counterparts ($k_{9} > k_{21}$, $k_{10} > k_{22}$, and $k_{11} > k_{23}$). However, the affinities of γ~c~ binding to ligand + IL-2Rβ and ligand + α-chain complexes were comparable between IL-2 and IL-15 ($k_{4} = k_{16}$ and $k_{5} = k_{17}$).


## Family model correctly captures both single and combination IL-4/IL-7 dose response

![**A reaction model captures cytokine-cytokine interactions.** A) XXX. B-C) Fitting model to experimental data. Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles. Shaded area represents 95% confidence interval of model prediction. pSTAT5 was measured for IL-7 experiments and pSTAT6 was measured for IL-4 experiments. B) Single-cytokine pSTAT dose-response measurements for 10 minutes of exposure to IL-4 and IL-7. C) Percent inhibition of the second cytokine’s pSTAT response in a dual-cytokine dose-response experiment. Human PBMCs were pretreated with various concentrations of one cytokine for 10 minutes before being stimulated with a fixed concentration (50 pg/mL IL-7 or 100 pg/mL IL-4) of the other cytokine for an additional 10 minutes. D)  Violin plot of posterior distributions seen for reverse reaction rates $k_{27}$ (γ~c~ dissociating from IL-7·IL-7Rα) and $k_{33}$ (γ~c~ dissociating from IL-4·IL-4Rα). Both rates had units of 1/min and are scaled by log~10~. E) Posterior distributions for trafficking rates when fit to IL-4 and IL-7 data. All trafficking rates had units 1/min and are scaled by log~10~. F) Set of receptor expression rates for human PBMCs based on flow cytometry quantification and trafficking parameters. G) Violin plot of posterior distributions seen for sigmoidal scaling constants of pSTAT5 ($C_{5}$) and pSTAT6 ($C_{6}$). H) Model predictions for percent of γ~c~ on the human PBMC surface when exposed to 100 pg/mL of either IL-7 or IL-4 for 100 minutes. I) Model predictions for percent inhibition of the second cytokine’s pSTAT response in a dual-cytokine dose-response experiment with the assumption that active species are endocytosed at the same rate as inactive species ($k_{endo,a} = 0$).](./Figures/figure2.svg){#fig:cytokInt}

While the active complexes of IL-2 and IL-15 involve the same signaling-competent receptors, preventing the activity contributions of each cytokine from being distinguished from one another, IL-4 and IL-7 activity can be distinguished when both cytokines were co-administered to cells since IL-4 and IL-7 produce pSTAT6 and pSTAT5 signaling, respectively [@Gonnordeaal1253]. Due to this phenomenon we fit data wherein IL-4 and IL-7 doses were administered to human PBMCs both independently and in combination [@Gonnordeaal1253].

Unlike our data for IL-2 and IL-15 in YT-1 cells, the data for IL-4 and IL-7 in human PBMCs was accompanied by measurements of number of IL-4Rα, IL-7Rα, and γ~c~ receptors per cell. We used a steady state assumption in the absence of autocrine ligand to solve for  receptor expression rates. We fit our model to both single and dual cytokine dose-response data sets with high accuracy ([@Fig:cytokInt]B-C). The fitting process allowed for reaction rates, trafficking parameters, and scaling constants to vary in order to fit the data ([@Fig:cytokInt]D-G). Even though receptor per cell measurements were fixed, the receptor expression rates still formed distributions since they are dependent on trafficking parameters ([@Fig:cytokInt]F). The forward rate of complexes dimerizing to any free receptor ($k_{fwd}$) was estimated to be 0.0536271143 ± 0.0139123847 $\mathrm{\frac{1/min}{num/cell}}$.

The experimental data and model predictions revealed that IL-7 inhibited IL-4 activity more than IL-4 inhibited IL-7 activity ([@Fig:cytokInt]C). Such inhibition behavior was explained by the competition of ligand + α-chain complexes for the common γ~c~. The K~D~ of this dimerization process for IL-7 ($k_{27}$) was smaller than the K~D~ for IL-4 ($k_{33}$), indicating that there was tighter dimerization of IL-7_IL-7Rα to γ~c~ than there was dimerization of IL-4_IL-4Rα to γ~c~ ([@Fig:cytokInt]D). The competition for γ~c~ was determined to play a larger role in signaling inhibition than receptor internalization since our model predicted that the majority of γ~c~ remained on the cell surface when cells were stimulated with 100 pg/mL of either IL-4 or IL-7 for 100 minutes ([@Fig:cytokInt]H).

Commit message:

just say both models converge

Manuscript/Text/02A_Results.md, after:

# Results

## Family model captures  IL-2 and IL-15 dose response and the effect of IL-2Rα expression

![**A family-wide model of the common gamma chain cytokine receptors.** A) Cartoon of all receptor-ligand complexes and binding events. Ligands are circles and complexes are boxes. Active species are outlined in red. Rate constants obtained from literature are denoted by diamonds; those solved through detailed balance are denoted by octagons and those solved through fitting are denoted by octagons with double outline. Rate constants that were measured as proportional to other rates are denoted by triangles.
B) Model prediction vs. experimental results for maximal pSTAT5 activation in YT-1 cells under various concentrations of ligand stimulation for 500 minutes. Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles for IL-2Rα- cells and circles for IL-2Rα+ cells. The 95% confidence intervals of model predictions are denoted by shaded regions.
C-D) Model prediction vs. experimental results for percent of initial IL-2Rβ on the cell surface for various ligand stimulation concentrations and cell types. Measurements were collected over the course of 90 minutes. Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles for IL-2Rα- cells and circles for IL-2Rα+ cells. The 95% confidence intervals of model predictions are denoted by shaded regions.
E) Posterior distributions for IL-2's and IL-15's analogous reaction rates. All rates have units of 1/min and are scaled by log~10~ for plotting purposes. Rates constants measured in literature are represented by dots.
F-G) Posterior distributions for trafficking rate parameters and receptor expression rates. Trafficking rates have units of 1/min and receptor expression rates have units of $\mathrm{\frac{number}{cell * minute}}$; both are scaled by log~10~ for plotting purposes.
H) Posterior distribution for the pSTAT5 activity scaling constant.
I) XXX. ](./Figures/figure1.svg){#fig:modelConstruct}

To model how individual binding events give rise to cell response, we built a reaction model representing the relevant binding and regulatory mechanisms within the common γ~c~ cytokine family ([@Fig:modelConstruct]A). As endocytic trafficking is a critical mechanism of regulatory feedback for surface receptors and their ligands, we extended earlier efforts by including trafficking of receptors and their complexes [@ring_mechanistic_2012; @Feinerman437]. We assumed that species trafficked into a distinct endocytic compartment where they could continue to produce STAT5 signaling and participate in binding events. Rate parameters for IL-2 and IL-15 binding events were parameterized by direct experimental measurement (diamond), soluble experimental measurement (triangle), detailed balance (octagon), or estimated by fitting model (double outlined octagon) to existing experimental measurements of pSTAT5 and surface IL-2Rβ ([@Fig:modelConstruct]B-D) [@ring_mechanistic_2012].

A novel feature of our model was that it accounted for endosomal trafficking and signaling. Trafficking was deemed an integral part of our model since rapid IL-2Rβ internalization following stimulation with either IL-2 or IL-15 was measured experimentally [@ring_mechanistic_2012]. The trafficking version of the model was fit to both pSTAT5 and surface IL-2Rβ measurements; the posterior parameter distributions taken from these fits were plugged back into our model and accurately fit the data ([@Fig:modelConstruct]B-D). The no-trafficking version of the model was fit to only the pSTAT5 measurements and consequently the posterior parameter distributions were more broadly defined than in the trafficking model ([@Fig:supp1]). Both the trafficking and no-trafficking models had Geweke scores that oscillated between -1 and 1, indicating that both models converged during MCMC sampling ([@Fig:supp2]) [@Geweke92]. Additionally, IL-2·IL-2Rα complexes had a higher affinity for IL-2Rβ and γ~c~ than their IL-15·IL-15Rα counterparts in the trafficking model ($k_{4} < k_{16}$ and $k_{11} < k_{23}$); however, the opposite was true for IL-2Rβ ($k_{4} > k_{16}$) and the affinities were equal for γ~c~ ($k_{11} = k_{23}$) in the no-trafficking model ([@Fig:modelConstruct]E, [@Fig:supp1]B). Depletion of surface IL-2Rβ occurs when YT-1 cells were given both IL-2 and IL-15 as both ligands could form active complexes with IL-2Rβ. Consistent with surface receptor depletion driven through rapid active complex internalization, depletion occurred faster at higher cytokine doses ([@Fig:modelConstruct]C-D). Correspondingly, the rate of active complex internalization ($k_{endo,a}$) was ~10x greater than that for inactive species ($k_{endo}$) ([@Fig:modelConstruct]F). In addition to capturing individual dose responses, the model accurately represented the effect of changes in IL-2Rα expression. The experimental pSTAT5 and surface IL-2Rβ data for both IL2-Rα-negative and -expressing YT-1 cells was fit by setting the IL-2Rα expression rate to 0 in the former case and letting the rate vary by the fit parameter in the latter case.

Our model produced specific predictions about the abundance of each receptor within YT-1 cells ([@Fig:modelConstruct]G). To validate these, we experimentally quantified the absolute receptor abundance for YT-1 cells. [add sentence about how accurate this winds up being].

Since IL-2 and IL-15 lead to formation of analogous active complexes, with IL-2Rβ, γ~c~, and a signaling-deficient high-affinity receptor (IL-2Rα/IL-15Rα), comparing their reaction rates gave insight into how IL-2 and IL-15 therapies differ from one another ([@Fig:modelConstruct]E). The reaction rate for forward dimerization ($k_{fwd}$) was estimated to be 0.0031015611 ± 0.0005404771 $\mathrm{\frac{1/min}{num/cell}}$. The two ligands had nearly the same affinity for binding directly to IL-2Rβ and neither ligand binds directly to γ~c~; however, IL-15 had a higher affinity for its α-chain than IL-2 did for its α-chain. We inferred that IL-15’s complexes were much more likely to dimerize with a free α-chain than IL-2’s complexes ($k_{12} >> k_{24}$ and $k_{8} >> k_{20}$). Similarly, IL-15 complexes had a slightly higher affinity for capturing IL-2Rβ and γ~c~ than their IL-2 counterparts ($k_{9} > k_{21}$, $k_{10} > k_{22}$, and $k_{11} > k_{23}$). However, the affinities of γ~c~ binding to ligand + IL-2Rβ and ligand + α-chain complexes were comparable between IL-2 and IL-15 ($k_{4} = k_{16}$ and $k_{5} = k_{17}$).


## Family model correctly captures both single and combination IL-4/IL-7 dose response

![**A reaction model captures cytokine-cytokine interactions.** A) XXX. B-C) Fitting model to experimental data. Experimental measurements are denoted by triangles. Shaded area represents 95% confidence interval of model prediction. pSTAT5 was measured for IL-7 experiments and pSTAT6 was measured for IL-4 experiments. B) Single-cytokine pSTAT dose-response measurements for 10 minutes of exposure to IL-4 and IL-7. C) Percent inhibition of the second cytokine’s pSTAT response in a dual-cytokine dose-response experiment. Human PBMCs were pretreated with various concentrations of one cytokine for 10 minutes before being stimulated with a fixed concentration (50 pg/mL IL-7 or 100 pg/mL IL-4) of the other cytokine for an additional 10 minutes. D)  Violin plot of posterior distributions seen for reverse reaction rates $k_{27}$ (γ~c~ dissociating from IL-7·IL-7Rα) and $k_{33}$ (γ~c~ dissociating from IL-4·IL-4Rα). Both rates had units of 1/min and are scaled by log~10~. E) Posterior distributions for trafficking rates when fit to IL-4 and IL-7 data. All trafficking rates had units 1/min and are scaled by log~10~. F) Set of receptor expression rates for human PBMCs based on flow cytometry quantification and trafficking parameters. G) Violin plot of posterior distributions seen for sigmoidal scaling constants of pSTAT5 ($C_{5}$) and pSTAT6 ($C_{6}$). H) Model predictions for percent of γ~c~ on the human PBMC surface when exposed to 100 pg/mL of either IL-7 or IL-4 for 100 minutes. I) Model predictions for percent inhibition of the second cytokine’s pSTAT response in a dual-cytokine dose-response experiment with the assumption that active species are endocytosed at the same rate as inactive species ($k_{endo,a} = 0$).](./Figures/figure2.svg){#fig:cytokInt}

While the active complexes of IL-2 and IL-15 involve the same signaling-competent receptors, preventing the activity contributions of each cytokine from being distinguished from one another, IL-4 and IL-7 activity can be distinguished when both cytokines were co-administered to cells since IL-4 and IL-7 produce pSTAT6 and pSTAT5 signaling, respectively [@Gonnordeaal1253]. Due to this phenomenon we fit data wherein IL-4 and IL-7 doses were administered to human PBMCs both independently and in combination [@Gonnordeaal1253].

Unlike our data for IL-2 and IL-15 in YT-1 cells, the data for IL-4 and IL-7 in human PBMCs was accompanied by measurements of number of IL-4Rα, IL-7Rα, and γ~c~ receptors per cell. We used a steady state assumption in the absence of autocrine ligand to solve for  receptor expression rates. We fit our model to both single and dual cytokine dose-response data sets with high accuracy ([@Fig:cytokInt]B-C). The fitting process allowed for reaction rates, trafficking parameters, and scaling constants to vary in order to fit the data ([@Fig:cytokInt]D-G). Even though receptor per cell measurements were fixed, the receptor expression rates still formed distributions since they are dependent on trafficking parameters ([@Fig:cytokInt]F). The forward rate of complexes dimerizing to any free receptor ($k_{fwd}$) was estimated to be 0.0536271143 ± 0.0139123847 $\mathrm{\frac{1/min}{num/cell}}$.

The experimental data and model predictions revealed that IL-7 inhibited IL-4 activity more than IL-4 inhibited IL-7 activity ([@Fig:cytokInt]C). Such inhibition behavior was explained by the competition of ligand + α-chain complexes for the common γ~c~. The K~D~ of this dimerization process for IL-7 ($k_{27}$) was smaller than the K~D~ for IL-4 ($k_{33}$), indicating that there was tighter dimerization of IL-7_IL-7Rα to γ~c~ than there was dimerization of IL-4_IL-4Rα to γ~c~ ([@Fig:cytokInt]D). The competition for γ~c~ was determined to play a larger role in signaling inhibition than receptor internalization since our model predicted that the majority of γ~c~ remained on the cell surface when cells were stimulated with 100 pg/mL of either IL-4 or IL-7 for 100 minutes ([@Fig:cytokInt]H).
