## Tensor Factorization Maps the Response-Space of the Gamma Chain Family

![**Tensor factorization to map possible cytokine response.** A) Measured receptor abundance for eleven PBMC-derived subpopulations. B-C) PCA scores (B) and loadings (C) of receptor abundance. E) $R^2X$ using non-negative CP decomposition plotted against the number of components the tensor was decomposed into. F) Timepoint decomposition plot with component values against time for each factorization component after decomposing the tensor into 3 components. G, H) Decomposition plot along the second (cell) dimension showing the 11 cell type values along each component. I) Ligand decomposition plot along the tensor’s third dimension revealing each ligand according to its shape and component number reflected by its color.](./Figures/figure3.svg){#fig:tfac}

Even with an accurate model, exploring a dynamic ligand response across the many responding cell types and ligand treatments remains challenging. Therefore, we sought to apply factorization as a means to visualize the ligand response across many different cell populations.

As response to ligand is largely defined by receptor expression, we quantitatively profiled the abundance of each IL-2, IL-15, and IL-7 receptor across eleven cell types ([@Fig:tfac]A). These data recapitulated known variation in these receptors, including... XXX. We applied principal component analysis (PCA) on these receptor measurements to help visualize variation in these data.      T helper cells, including memory and naïve, score the highest positive value along the first component similar to IL-7Rα suggesting a positive correlation ([@Fig:tfac]B-C). Cells similar in profile to NK cells show a large, positive scores value along the second component which match up with IL-2Rβ on the same component; yet these cells have higher negative values on the first component opposing IL-7Rα’s positive loadings value demonstrating an unfavored correspondence ([@Fig:tfac]B-C). Regulatory T cells, including memory and naïve subspecies, show relatively negative values along both components similar to IL-2Rα suggesting stronger correlation than other cells ([@Fig:tfac]B-C).

Upon fitting the model to experimental measurements and obtaining the unknown parameters, we ran simulations on the 11 cell types and monitored their interleukin activity with time. This presented a three-dimensional (time, cell type, ligand) tensor which we then decomposed with non-negative CP decomposition ([@Fig:tfac]D). In the model, we defined cell types by the quantity of each receptor subspecies on their surfaces. In our simulations, each cell was treated with a single interleukin over a range of concentrations ($10^{-4}$ to $100$ nM). This allowed us to build a tensor dataset for the following ligands: wild type IL-2, mutant IL-2, and wild types IL-7 and IL-15. The mutant IL-2 ligand was known to have a 10x enriched affinity for IL-2Rα compared to wild type IL-2 ($10 * k_{1,mut} = k_{1,wt}$). After constructing the tensor with these simulations, we iteratively decomposed it while varying the number of components to determine the minimum number of components needed to obtain a percent explained variance ($\mathrm{R^{2}X}$) above 90%. The $\mathrm{R^{2}X}$ value increased as we increased the number of components and we reached the 90% threshold with three components ($\mathrm{R^{2}X}$ of 93.1%) ([@Fig:tfac]E). To show the relationships among the three dimensions of the tensor, the component values of each dimension were plotted against each other, and the dimensions were placed side by side for interpretation. The tensor’s first dimension was time, second was cell type, and third was ligands.

The decomposition plot for the tensor’s first dimension, time, showed a parabolic relation that increased to a maximum around the 50-minute mark then continued to decrease for all ligands throughout stimulation ([@Fig:tfac]F). For the first decomposition component, the mutant IL-2 scored the highest values across the ligand concentration profile ([@Fig:tfac]I). From the cell decomposition plots and on the same first component, we deduced that the cells that responded to a greater extent to the mutant IL-2 were regulatory and cytotoxic T cells. Furthermore, the third decomposition component revealed activity responses almost exclusive to the mutant IL-2 in regulatory T cells. This further lends support for IL-2Rα affinity enriched mutants that demonstrate selective activation for regulatory T cells [@peterson2018long]. Still on the first component, WT IL-2 and IL-15 cytokines elicited relatively strong activation in cytotoxic CD8+ cells, naïve CD8+, memory CD8+, and NK cells. These cells expressed higher IL-2Rβ levels than T helper cells ([@Fig:tfac]A) which differentially tuned their response to IL-2 and IL-15 [@Smitheaan4931]. In component one, IL-2 and IL-15 had relatively similar responses. This stems from the fact that our receptor measurements did not detect IL-15Rα levels, so it required higher doses to achieve a similar activity response. On the second decomposition component, IL-7 was more pronounced ([@Fig:tfac]I). T helper cells, including memory and naïve, had a higher score on the second component, indicating a preferred response to IL-7 ([@Fig:tfac]G); IL-7 activates T helper cells and promotes their survival and maturation [@hassan19987]. Other tensor decomposition methods can also be applied to this tensor. For example, we performed a non-negative Tucker decomposition and showed similar plots in [@Fig:supp4].

## Tensor Factorization Shows Experimental Results

Given that this generated tensor was obtained through running simulations, we showed that the decomposition techniques can also be applied to experimental measurements. We collected ligand activity data for cells treated with either wild type IL-2 or IL-15 in a similar setup and constructed a tensor. Non-negative CP decomposition was performed on this experimental tensor, and similar cell, time, and ligand decomposition plots are shown in [@Fig:expDose].
